Title: Curql Fund II Nears Close at $309 Million with 83 Credit Union Investors
URL: https://venturebeat.com/business/curql-fund-ii-nears-close-at-309-million-with-83-credit-union-investors/

Final opportunity to join the largest credit union-led fintech investment fund before July deadline

DES MOINES, Iowa–(BUSINESS WIRE)–May 1, 2025–

Curql, a collective of credit unions jointly investing in fintech, proudly announced today that Curql Fund II has surpassed $300 million in capital raised from 83 progressive credit unions across the nation. With the fund set to close at the end of July, credit unions now face their final opportunity to participate in a movement that’s reshaping the financial services landscape – led by credit unions, for credit unions.

Curql Fund I brought 64 credit unions together to invest $254 million, ultimately backing 38 fintech companies. Curql Fund II has already surpassed those milestones, and with greater capital and more credit unions aligned, the number of transformative fintech solutions in the portfolio is expected to grow significantly.

To date, Curql investors have unlocked approximately $12 million in savings through negotiated fintech discounts, exclusive pricing, and early-access opportunities. With a broader portfolio expected through Fund II, the collective value of discounts and strategic benefits is anticipated to expand even further.

“This is about more than just investment – it’s about positioning credit unions to shape the future of fintech on their terms,” said Nick Evens, President & CEO of Curql Collective. “Credit unions that join Curql Fund II are joining a movement to drive smarter, more relevant and member-centric innovation across the industry.”

Curql Fund II provides credit unions with:

Direct access to a growing pipeline of fintech solutions aligned with credit union needs

Exclusive savings through preferred pricing agreements across the portfolio

A seat at the table to help shape the future of financial technology alongside other credit union leaders

Ownership stake in the only credit union-focused fintech fund of its kind

The investment window for Fund II closes July 31, 2025. Onboarding, board approval, and legal processes typically take 2–3 months – making now the time for credit unions to initiate internal review if they wish to participate.

Credit unions interested in learning more can visit www.curql.com/credit-unions or contact the Curql team for next steps.

About Curql Collective

Curql, a collective of over 130 credit unions jointly investing in fintech, brings timely solutions to the credit union industry. With over 40 fintech partners in the Collective Portfolio, Curql ensures that technology is designed specifically for credit unions, allowing them to better serve their members and remain competitive in an evolving financial landscape. Visit curql.com/credit-unions/ to learn more before the window to join closes.

View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20250501016196/en/

Kristin Evans

VP, MarCom

727-303-2316

kristin@curql.com