Title: Fidus Global Pioneers Next Wave of Warehouse Automation With Acquisition of Software Assets From Fulfilld
URL: https://venturebeat.com/business/fidus-global-pioneers-next-wave-of-warehouse-automation-with-acquisition-of-software-assets-from-fulfilld/

PARAGOULD, Ark.–(BUSINESS WIRE)–April 30, 2025–

Fidus Global, an innovative warehouse software solution and full-service controls engineering firm, today announced the acquisition of Fulfilld, Inc, makers of a Warehouse Management System (WMS) and AI-Powered Slotting Solution. The acquisition will provide a strong technical foundation that enables Fidus to expand beyond equipment control into broader warehouse management, accelerating progress to create the industry’s first truly open-architecture automation suite that is poised to revolutionize the future of warehouse automation.

With this acquisition, Fidus will gain key assets from Fulfilld-a WMS system and an AI-powered slotting solution-that accelerate progress toward Fidus’ own open-architecture solutions that aim to provide customers true ownership, flexibility, and long-term control over their warehouse automation technology. Additionally, several key engineers from Fulfilld will join the Fidus team.

“Our core philosophy at Fidus has always been that technology should adapt to how people work, not force people and businesses to adapt to the technology,” remarks Aarron Hale, CEO of Fidus Global, “and now with the integration of sophisticated core assets from Fulfilld, we are able to take meaningful steps to create a comprehensive approach that ultimately frees businesses from the limitations of closed, vendor-controlled systems across their entire warehouse operation. We are excited to welcome our new team members from Fulfilld, and plan to make significant strides towards an unrivaled open-architecture Enterprise Control Platform.”

Fidus Global is committed to building the industry’s first truly open-architecture Enterprise Control Platform (ECP)-a comprehensive automation suite that will give operators control over every aspect of their material handling ecosystem.

To learn more about Fidus Global and the Fulfilld acquisition, please visit https://blog.fidusglobal.com/en/blog/fidus-global-acquires-fulfilld-inc. For press inquiries, please contact Kailee Ayers at kayers@fidusglobal.com.

ABOUT FIDUS GLOBAL

Fidus Global is a warehouse software solutions firm and a full-service controls engineering firm with a diverse range of expertise that spans across retail, eCommerce, logistics, and manufacturing. Fidus provides clients with exceptional solutions in industrial automation with a team composed of seasoned engineers from leading corporations including Amazon, FedEx, Tyson Foods, and Walmart. Through the launch of Pontem (Best IT Innovation Award 2025, MHI), the industry’s first open architecture Warehouse Control System (WCS) that puts the customer back in control with both flexibility and scalability, Fidus Global is reshaping the future of warehouse automation.

Fidusglobal.com

View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20250430244320/en/

MEDIA

Kailee Ayers

kayers@fidusglobal.com