Title: Gamefam launches Karate Kid Training Simulator on Roblox
URL: https://venturebeat.com/games/gamefam-launches-karate-kid-training-simulator-on-roblox/

Gamefam is launching Karate Kid Training Simulator, a title that will immerse players in the world of the upcoming film Karate Kid: Legends, on Roblox.

Gamefam‘s training simulator enables players to train alongside iconic characters like Daniel LaRusso and Mr. Han in recognizable scenes from the new movie including the streets of New York, the rooftop dojo, and Victory Pizza. It’s another example of hundreds of brands moving onto Roblox to be where the young folk are.

Players will learn karate moves, honing their skills to compete against other players. Through engaging and impactful moves, players will master their craft, leveling up to battle against other masters and complete weekly Karate Kid: Legends quests.

Users who successfully complete the challenges will earn unique movie-themed rewards including a bonsai tree head and bandana, Victory Pizza Box Backpack, and Karate Kid: Legends Trophy Popcorn Bucket hat avatar items.

Ricardo Briceno, chief business officer at Gamefam, said in a statement, “Reaching Gen Z and Alpha requires more than just traditional marketing—it takes showing up in the worlds where they play and hang out with friends. Roblox has become essential for building cultural relevance, especially in the lead-up to major theatrical releases. With Karate Kid, we have an opportunity to reintroduce an iconic franchise to a new generation of fans in a way that’s interactive, immersive and unforgettable.”

To further build awareness, the launch will also feature a curated influencer program centered around top Roblox creators who deeply resonate with the Roblox community around the world. The campaign will also activate Roblox’s suite of advertising solutions, including Video, Billboard ads, as well as the Premium Home ad unit for a home page takeover, driving movie interest and buzz across the Roblox platform.

Karate Kid Training Simulator will be available to play for free for a limited time on Roblox via most platforms and devices, including consoles, PCs, mobile and tablets starting on Friday, May 2, 2025.

Sony Pictures’ Karate Kid: Legends hits U.S./Canadian theatres on Friday, May 30, 2025. The film unites the iconic martial arts masters of one of the most beloved film franchises of all time to tell a completely new story full of action and heart.

When kung fu prodigy Li Fong (Ben Wang) relocates to New York City with his mother to attend a prestigious new school, he finds solace in a new friendship with a classmate and her father. But his newfound peace is short-lived after he attracts unwanted attention from a formidable local karate champion.

Driven by a desire to defend himself, Li embarks on a journey to enter the ultimate karate competition. Guided by the wisdom of his kung fu teacher, Mr. Han (Jackie Chan), and the legendary Karate Kid, Daniel LaRusso (Ralph Macchio), Li merges their unique styles to prepare for an epic martial arts showdown.

Directed by Jonathan Entwistle. Written by Rob Lieber. Produced by Karen Rosenfelt. Executive producers are Jenny Hinkey and Ralph Macchio. Starring Jackie Chan and Ralph Macchio, the film also stars Ben Wang, Joshua Jackson, Sadie Stanley and Ming-Na Wen.

Gamefam is a “metaverse media” company for Gen Z and Alpha communities. Pairing expert brand strategists with world-class developers, Gamefam successfully delivers strategies for its brand and IP partners through an industry-leading network of games across Roblox, Fortnite and other platforms, driving reach and scale with 360-degree amplification programs informed by proprietary insights and measurement solutions.

Established in 2019 as the first professional Roblox developer, Gamefam has now become the largest and most successful metaverse media company, with 45 billion lifetime visits and 35 million average daily visits across its 30+ live-operated game portfolio on Roblox, Fortnite and other platforms. Gamefam has delivered winning metaverse strategies, games and campaigns with top IP partners including Paramount, Warner Music Group, the NFL, Netflix, Mattel, Sony Pictures, Sega, Samsung and Crunchyroll.

The company successfully created three of the top 10 brand games on Roblox of all time; three of the top five Roblox concerts of all time; and the first-ever brand integration into a Fortnite game. Gamefam’s top IP-based and original franchises include Sonic Speed Simulator, Twilight Daycare, Barbie DreamHouse Tycoon, SpongeBob Simulator, Deadpines: Zombie Survival, Obby But on a Bike HD, Super League Soccer and Car Dealership Tycoon.