Title: Gillette and EA Sports FC partner on in-game ads and soccer Ultimate Team packs
URL: https://venturebeat.com/games/gillette-and-ea-sports-fc-partner-on-in-game-ads-and-soccer-ultimate-team-packs/

Gillette and EA Sports FC have partnered in a global brand deal aimed at elevating how fans experience the game of soccer on and off the pitch.

The deal unites Gillette, a 115-year-old men’s grooming brand, and EA Sports FC, a sports gaming brand with 30 years of history. The deal comes a day after news surfaced that EA is doing layoffs at its Respawn Entertainment division.

The partnership kicked off in January with EA Sports FC 25 featuring Gillette as part of in-game LED ad banner signage and is now moving to the next level offering Football Ultimate Team packs, available to redeem for a limited time. To elevate this experience, Gillette is partnering with global content creators to showcase their “razor-sharp” skills on and off the pitch.

Together, Gillette and EA Sports FC aspire to inspire athletes, fans, and gamers everywhere to feel sharp and play sharp.

Building on Gillette’s storied legacy as a brand supporting sports, recently strengthened by their three-year licensing partnership with the UEFA Champions League and New England Revolution jersey sponsorship, this collaboration further elevates Gillette’s global presence across gaming and football. Gillette has consistently grown its presence in soccer and is dedicated to fostering the growth of the sport at all levels.

“This partnership with EA Sports FC represents a defining moment for Gillette as we celebrate the momentum and continued growth of the brand’s presence in football on and off the pitch globally,”

said Daniel Ordoñez, vice president for Gillette global brand franchise, in a statement. “As we build upon our commitment to the sport, we’re excited to deepen our roots while connecting with the next generation of men and engaging the larger global football community in authentic ways.”

Gillette’s dedication shines through the precision-engineering of its products, crafted to deliver an unparalleled grooming experience. This collaboration shows how the value of Gillette’s superior performance and precision extends beyond grooming for its consumers, but also to its partnership like EA Sports FC 25. When fans feel their best, they play their best.

“We’re thrilled to partner with Gillette in EA SPORTS FC 25, as their commitment and impact continues

to grow in football,” said Charlie Villiers, Sr. Director, Franchise Marketing EA SPORTS FC. “Through this

collaboration, we’re able to celebrate our shared passion for the world’s game and create innovative

and authentic ways to engage with both the Gillette and EA SPORTS FC communities.”

Connecting hundreds of millions of football fans through console, mobile, online, and esports products, EA Sports FC boasts a big global audience. This partnership represents a strategic step for Gillette, leveraging EA Sports FC’s dedicated player community to further connect with gamers. By aligning with EA Sports FC, Gillette is deepening its integration in both sports and gaming, amplifying its brand presence, and reinforcing its commitment to engaging consumers in innovative and meaningful

ways.