Title: How big tech hijacked its sharpest, funniest critics
URL: https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/02/21/905817/how-big-tech-hijacked-its-sharpest-funniest-critics/

A science fiction novelist who’d helped launch the cyberpunk movement in the 1980s, Sterling had actually coined the term design fiction in a 2005 book, but he hadn’t exactly taken ownership of the still-nebulous concept. What happened that day made it much clearer, though, and set off an explosion of ideas for everyone in attendance.

“People went out of that room and they were kind of visibly shaken,” he says. “Some guy came up in the back and told us, with this pale kind of look, ‘I think I’m starting to get it.’”

The panel’s organizer was Julian Bleecker, an artist, technologist, and product designer from Los Angeles. He wanted to share his work—a new practice where designers and engineers used their skills to go beyond just thinking up and prototyping new consumer products. He wanted them to create objects that were not intended to be real products but could have been, and use them as

portals for talking about tomorrow.

“Design fiction is a mix of science fact, design and science fiction,” Bleecker wrote on his blog in 2009. It “recombines the traditions of writing and storytelling with the material crafting of objects.” The objects made in design fiction are “diagetic prototypes,” he suggested. They are “props that help focus the imagination and speculate about possible near future worlds—whether profound change or simple, even mundane social practices.”

One of the earliest examples is the late artist Sascha Pohflepp’s Buttons: Blind Camera. Made in 2010, it is a sleek-looking digital camera that takes the minimal, post-Apple industrial design aesthetic to an extreme. It has only one button, a small color screen, and apparently no lens. Press the button and it, like any other camera, captures a moment of time in the form of a photograph. The difference is that it’s not a moment of your time. Instead, the camera connects to the internet to find another photo taken and shared by somebody else at the exact time you pressed that button, downloads it, and displays it on the screen.

It was a brilliantly simple idea, but crucially, it was not just a piece of concept art, or a prop in a speculative movie, or an art student’s mock-up. It was a real, functioning device. Pohflepp built it from the guts of a Sony Ericsson cell phone and code he’d written himself.

“It’s an object that’s somehow imbued with kind of a narrative function,” Bleecker says. “It helps tell a story; it pushes and pulls on characters in certain ways. I think the classic example is the Maltese Falcon. Hitchcock called them MacGuffins. It’s the thing around which the drama evolves and develops and moves.”

In design fiction, the process of making—rather than just imagining—is the process of learning. “I don’t want to dismiss the significance or importance of a good creative idea, but ideas are kind of like a dime a dozen,” Bleecker says.