Title: How biotech went from “no way” to payday in the cannabis business
URL: https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/05/13/975/how-biotech-went-from-no-way-to-payday-in-the-cannabis-business/

“What made you do this, how often do you do this?” Melo says he asked. “I really wanted to understand the psyche here. What are they looking for, and what do they get?”

Getty / nantonov

The reason for the questions was that Amyris was about to get into cannabis, too. The company, which previously showed that it could use baker’s yeast to make jet fuel, a malaria drug, and no-calorie sweeteners, now believes it can genetically engineer the same organisms to manufacture cannabinoids, the active molecules in marijuana, more cheaply than by growing plants, which require a lot of water, space, and electricity.

John Melo, CEO of Amyris Amyris

But if this worked, he understood, cannabinoids could end up everywhere, in new forms, and reach new people. So Melo needed to resolve his own doubts. “I spent several years saying absolutely not,” he says, adding that his wife was “completely against” the idea.

His company, however, needed the business. Its biofuel venture had failed to be competitive, leaving a billion-dollar crater in its balance sheet. Now Melo wanted to know what a world awash in cannabinoids was like. “It was market research that led me to have moral research. Is there a moral question?” he says. “If we as a society consume [this] throughout the day to relax, what does that mean?”

Melo isn’t alone. As biotechnology embraces the legal cannabis industry, not a few of its executives are grappling with a dilemma: what will it mean if they make the drug much easier to get?

So far, 33 US states have legalized medical marijuana, and 10 of these also permit recreational use. In October 2018, Canada permitted pot sales nationally. Health Canada expects that its citizens will consume 926,000 kilograms of cannabis this year, or one to two billion joints’ worth. Most will be consumed by daily pot smokers, who make up about 5% of Canada’s adult population, according to the agency.

Legalization has brought investors racing to stake their claim. Entrepreneurs in Denver erected so many greenhouses that the city’s electricity use surged noticeably. So it wasn’t long before genetic engineers realized they might be able to replace all those acres of plants. “In 2017, we started getting calls for scientists with experience in yeast, and I said, ‘What in the world ...?” recalls Kara Bradford, head of Viridian Staffing, a headhunter who specializes in finding agronomists and other specialists for the cannabis industry.

AP

At first, Bradford says, the inquiries were highly confidential. Now, though, the race to make cannabinoids in microorganisms is out in the open. A dozen synthetic-biology companies, including Amyris, Ginkgo Bioworks, Hyasynth, Farmako, and Intrexon, say they are moving the cannabis genes into bacteria, oozing algae, or fermenting vats of yeast. This year, biologists at the University of California, Berkeley, inserted the critical steps in the cannabinoid recipe into yeast cells and reported the results in the journal Nature.