Title: Lamborghini joins DreamHack Dallas as a main partner
URL: https://venturebeat.com/games/lamborghini-joins-dreamhack-dallas-as-a-main-partner/

Automobili Lamborghini announced that it has joined DreamHack Dallas as a main partner, a first-time collaboration with event organizer ESL Faceit Group. The car company said it plans to bring a one-of-a-kind custom Lamborghini Revuelto to the event (in both physical and digital form), which will be a way of connecting with the expansive esports and gaming audience that attends the event. DreamHack takes place in Dallas on May 23-25.

According to Lamborghini, attendees will be able to see the Revuelto in its massive 300 square meter booth, as well as drive it in virtual races in one of the Asphalt games at the booth. They’ll also be able to secure digital collectibles unique the experience. This move marks a “strategic expansion for the brand” as it plans to engage a younger demographic directly via DreamHack, offering them a closer relationship with the brand.

Christian Mastro, Lamborghini’s marketing director, said in a statement, “This marks not only Lamborghini’s first-ever appearance at DreamHack, but also the debut of any automotive brand at the event. In collaboration with ESL Faceit Group, we’re bringing the unparalleled Lamborghini experience to a vibrant and passionate gaming audience. Automobili Lamborghini embodies more than just automotive excellence; it represents a symbol of achievement, a lifestyle, and a dream. Lamborghini’s design, with its iconic and cutting-edge style, resonates powerfully with the new generations — they instantly recognize it and see it as a true expression of their values, aspirations, and identity.”

Jasmin Haasbach, ESL Faceit Group’s VP of global brand partnerships, added, “Partnering with Automobili Lamborghini will elevate DreamHack Dallas to a new realm of immersive joy and unforgettable energy. Lamborghini’s spirit of going beyond convention, beyond performance, beyond expectation, will find a natural home at DreamHack, where gaming culture comes to life. Together, we’re creating a space where lifestyle, esports, sim racing, and the metaverse collide in a celebration of passion, innovation, and community.”