Title: The US military is funding an effort to catch deepfakes and other AI trickery
URL: https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/05/23/142770/the-us-military-is-funding-an-effort-to-catch-deepfakes-and-other-ai-trickery/

While it has long been possible for a skilled graphics expert to produce convincing-looking forgeries, AI will make the technology far more accessible. “It’s gone from state-sponsored actors and Hollywood to someone on Reddit,” says Hany Farid, a professor at Dartmouth who specializes in digital forensics. “The urgency we feel now is in protecting democracy.”

Deepfakes use a popular machine-learning technique known as deep learning to automatically incorporate a new face into an existing video. When large amounts of data are fed into a very big or “deep” simulated neural network, a computer can learn to perform all sorts of useful tasks, such as very accurate face recognition. But the same approach makes malicious video manipulation easier too. A tool released online lets anyone with modest technical expertise generate new deepfakes. And the creator of that tool told Motherboard that an even more user-friendly version is in the works.

The problem, of course, extends far beyond face-swapping. Experts increasingly say that before long it may be much harder to know if a photo, video, or audio clip has been generated by a machine. Google has even developed a tool called Duplex that uses AI to fake a phone call.

Aviv Ovadya, chief technologist at the University of Michigan’s Center for Social Media Responsibility, worries that the AI technologies now being developed might be used to harm someone’s reputation, influence an election, or worse. “These technologies can be used in wonderful ways for entertainment, and also lots of very terrifying ways,” Ovadya said at a May 15 event organized by Bloomberg. “You already have modified images being used to cause real violence across the developing world,” he said. “That’s a real and present danger.”

If technology cannot be used to catch fakery and misinformation, there may be a push to use the law instead. In fact, Malaysia introduced laws against fake news this April. However, Dartmouth’s Farid says this may itself prove problematic because the truth is, itself, a slippery subject. “How do you define fake news? It’s not as easy as you might think,” he says. “I can crop an image and fundamentally change an image. And what do you do with the Onion?”