Title: Water where you need it
URL: https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/04/15/999398/water-where-you-need-it/

There, on the muddy banks of a river riddled with cholera, Friesen saw the tracks of hyenas and men, reminders of what might await any girl who lingered.

The scene also stood as a reminder that an estimated 2.2 billion people worldwide lack safe drinking water, including these vulnerable Kenyan girls 200 miles north of Nairobi.

Friesen eliminated that daily trek to the river by installing an array of 40 devices resembling solar panels on the foundation’s grounds. He designed the device, which he calls the Source Hydropanel, to pull water out of air, powered only by solar energy. It solved the water safety crisis at the Kenyan girls’ refuge—and Friesen says his device can do the same for people around the globe who lack access to clean drinking water.

Residents of Bahia Hondita on the La Guajira peninsula in Colombia now get water from an array of Source hydropanels instead of relying on brackish water from a local borehole. ZERO MASS WATER

Friesen first got interested in water growing up in what were then relatively rural suburbs southeast of Phoenix. “As a kid hiking in the desert, we were always hiking to a body of water like a creek or a spring,” he says. “From an early age, appreciating the importance and significance of water was just a part of my life.” He’d also always been curious about how things worked, the kind of kid who tore apart the new toy car on Christmas morning and had it reassembled by lunchtime. So as a teen chancing upon stands of cottonwoods and natural springs on hikes, he’d not only ponder the value of water but also think about the infrastructure that got it from the Colorado River to metro Phoenix. He figured there was a better alternative to the existing solution: damming one of North America’s mightiest rivers and pumping its water hundreds of miles.

When he started at Arizona State University as an undergraduate, he gravitated to materials science, which he calls a “trifecta of physics, chemistry, and mechanical engineering.” His doctoral research at MIT focused on the properties of thin metallic films and the quantum mechanics of catalysis related to fuel cells. Upon earning his PhD in 2004, he returned to ASU, joining the materials science faculty at the Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering.

In his new lab at ASU, he turned his attention to building a better battery. Within three years, Friesen had created a rechargeable zinc-air battery and founded a startup called Fluidic Energy to commercialize it. He followed that with his water-from-air hydropanel and in 2014 launched his second venture, Zero Mass Water, to refine, manufacture, and distribute it.

Friesen describes similar origins and paths of discovery for each. In both cases, he started by trying to understand and then reframe big-picture problems. He then looked for ways to address them using materials that were best suited to the particular chemical and physical challenges at issue. It’s an approach he says was instilled at MIT, where people focus on tough challenges and “are constantly thinking about how to hack together new solutions,” he says.

The zinc-air battery had its genesis when Friesen looked at the periodic table and asked what the cheapest possible battery would be. That led him to think about oxygen in the air as the cathode and zinc metal as the anode. Zinc-air batteries had been around for about 100 years, but nobody knew how to recharge them. They discharge the energy stored in the zinc by exposing it to the air’s oxygen, creating zinc oxide and releasing electrons. But recharging the battery causes spiky crystals, or dendrites, of zinc to build up on the surface of the anode, making it impossible to recharge it more than a few times. To get around the dendrite problem, Friesen created a layered nickel scaffold with an array of holes in various sizes; the layers are characterized by different electrical properties. Zinc is plated to the scaffold, which then functions as a porous anode, and a mix of potassium hydroxide and ionic liquid-based additives serves as an electrolyte. When the electrolyte passes through the anode during charging and discharging, this mixture works with the pores and the layered structure to prevent dendrites from forming and building up. As a result, the batteries can be recharged repeatedly and are designed to last more than 10 years.